विज्ञान के नियम

उन भौतिक नियमों को विज्ञान के नियम कहा जाता है जो सार्वत्रिक (universal) समझे जाते हैं तथा जो भौतिक जगत के अपरिवर्तनशील तथ्य हैं।

एक मोटे अनुमान के अनुसार ब्रह्माण्ड में कोई १८ मूल भौतिक नियम होंगे।

तरल यांत्रिकी
बल, द्रव्यमान एवं त्वरण

उष्मा, उर्जा एवं ताप

क्वाण्टम यांत्रिकी
संरक्षन के नियम विज्ञान में सर्वाधिक महत्व रखते हैं।


ये मूल नियम स्पेस, समय एवं कला (phase) की समांगता (homogeneity) के परिणाम हैं। एमी नीदर का प्रमेय (Emmy Noether theorem) देखिये।

Other less significant (non fundamental) laws are the mathematical consequences of the above conservation laws for derivative physical quantities (mathematically defined as force, pressure, temperature, density, force fields, etc):



Chemical laws are those laws of nature relevant to chemistry. The most fundamental concept in chemistry is the law of conservation of mass, which states that there is no detectable change in the quantity of matter during an ordinary chemical reaction. Modern physics shows that it is actually energy that is conserved, and that energy and mass are related; a concept which becomes important in nuclear chemistry. Conservation of energy leads to the important concepts of equilibrium, thermodynamics, and kinetics.

Additional laws of chemistry elaborate on the law of conservation of mass. Joseph Proust's law of definite composition says that pure chemicals are composed of elements in a definite formulation; we now know that the structural arrangement of these elements is also important.

Dalton's law of multiple proportions says that these chemicals will present themselves in proportions that are small whole numbers (i.e. 1:2 O:H in water); although in many systems (notably biomacromolecules and minerals) the ratios tend to require large numbers, and are frequently represented as a fraction. 

More modern laws of chemistry define the relationship between energy and transformations. 


Thermodynamics

क्वाण्टम यांत्रिकी

It is thought that the successful integration of Einstein's field equations with the uncertainty principle and Schrödinger equation, something no one has achieved so far with a testable theory, will lead to a theory of quantum gravity, the most basic physical law sought after today.



