विश्व के आश्चर्य

समय-समय पर विश्व के आश्चर्य सबसे शानदार मानव निर्मित निर्माण और दुनिया में प्राकृतिक धरोहर की सूची को सदियों से संकलित किया गया है।

प्राचीन विश्व के सात आश्चर्य ,प्राचीन पुरातनता के सबसे उल्लेखनीय मानव निर्मित कृतियों की पहली ज्ञात सूची है, और उनपर किताबें यूनानी दृष्टि-संत के बीच लोकप्रिय आधारित था और केवल भूमध्य के आसपास स्थित निर्माण शामिल है। जो सात की संख्या में चुना गया था क्योंकि यूनानियों ने इसे माना और बहुतो द्वारा इसे प्रतिनिधित्व किया गाया। इसी तरह के कई सूचियाँ मध्ययुगीन दुनिया और आधुनिक दुनिया के लिए बनायीं गयीं है

The historian Herodotus (484 BC–ca. 425 BC), and the scholar Callimachus of Cyrene (ca 305–240 BC) at the Museum of Alexandria, made early lists of Seven wonders but their writings have not survived, except as references. The seven wonders included:


The earliest lists had the Ishtar Gate as the seventh wonder of the world instead of the Lighthouse of Alexandria.

The Greek category was not Wonders but ""thaumata""(Greek: Θαύματα), which translates closer to "things to be seen". The list that we know today was compiled in the Middle Ages—by which time many of the sites were no longer in existence. Today, the only ancient world wonder that still exists is the Great Pyramid of Giza.

Many lists of wonders of the world are said to have existed during the Middle Ages, although it is unlikely that these lists originated at that time because the word medieval was not even invented until the Enlightenment-era, and the concept of a Middle Age did not become popular until the 16th century. Brewer's refers to them as "later list[s]" suggesting the lists were created after the Middle Ages. 

Many of the structures on these lists were built much earlier than the Medieval Ages, but were well known. These lists go by names such as Wonders of the Middle Ages (implying no specific limitation to seven), Seven Wonders of the Middle Ages, Medieval Mind and Architectural Wonders of the Middle Ages. 

Typically representative of the seven greatest wonders of the Medieval world are:

Other sites included on such lists: 

Many lists have been made of the greatest structures built during modern times or of the greatest wonders existing today. Some of the most notable lists are presented below. 

The American Society of Civil Engineers compiled a list of wonders of the modern world:

In 2001 an initiative was started by the Swiss corporation New7Wonders Foundation to choose the New Seven Wonders of the World from a selection of 200 existing monuments for profit. Twenty-one finalists were announced January 1, 2006. Egypt was not happy with the fact that the only original wonder would have to compete with the likes of the Statue of Liberty, the Sydney Opera House, and other landmarks; and called the project absurd. To solve this, Giza was named an honorary Candidate. The results were announced on July 7 2007 in Benfica's stadium in a big ceremony in Lisbon, Portugal, and are listed here:

In November 2006 the American national newspaper "USA Today" in conjunction with the American television show "Good Morning America" revealed a list of New Seven Wonders as chosen by six judges. The wonders were announced one per day over a week on "Good Morning America". An eighth wonder was chosen on November 24 from viewer feedback. 

Similar to the other lists of wonders, there is no consensus on a list of seven natural wonders of the world, as there has been debate over how large the list should be. One of the many lists was compiled by CNN:


New7Wonders of Nature is a contemporary effort to create a list of seven natural wonders chosen by people through a global poll, organized by New Open World Corporation (NOWC), which ran the New Seven Wonders of the World campaign.

Seven Natural Wonders: is a not for profit endeavour created to protect the seven natural wonders that have already been established.

The Seven Underwater Wonders of the World was a list drawn up by CEDAM International, an American-based non-profit group for divers, dedicated to ocean preservation and research. 

In 1989 CEDAM brought together a panel of marine scientists, including Dr. Eugenie Clark, to pick underwater areas which they considered to be worthy of protection. The results were announced at The National Aquarium in Washington DC by actor Lloyd Bridges, star of TV's "Sea Hunt":


British author Deborah Cadbury wrote "Seven Wonders of the Industrial World", a book telling the stories of seven great feats of engineering of the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries. In 2003 the BBC made a seven-part documentary series on the book, with each episode dramatising the construction one of the wonders. The seven industrial wonders are:
Travel writer Howard Hillman is one of many who have compiled lists of the top man-made 
and natural 
tourist travel wonders of the world:



