नारायण हृदयालय

नारायण हृदयालय (), भारत के राज्य कर्नाटक के शहर बैंगलोर में स्थित हृदय और बालरोगों से संबंधित विश्व के सबसे बड़े अस्पतालों में से एक है। यह अस्पताल विश्व प्रसिद्ध हृदयरोग विशेषज्ञ, डॉ देवी शेट्ठी की प्रेरणा है। नारायण हृदयालय में ईलाज के लिए विदेशों से मरीज आते हैं और इसने पच्चीस देशों के 15000 लोगों का ऑपरेशन करने का रिकॉर्ड बनाया है। यह टेलीमेडिसीन सेवा भी मुहैया कराता है और वो मुफ्त में सेवा मुहैया कराता है।

2001 में डॉ देवी शेट्ठी ने नारायण हृदयालय की शुरुआत एशियन हार्ट फाउंडेशन (एएचएफ)के नाम से की। उन्होंने इस अस्पताल की शुरुआत करने के लिए बैंगलोर को चुना, क्योंकि उनके परिवार ने किसी दूसरी जगह अस्पताल के लिए धन देने से इनकार कर दिया। इस अस्पाल के लिए वित्तीय सहायता डॉ शेट्ठी के ससुर ने दी।. नारायण हृदयालय 25 एकड़ में बैंगलोर के औद्योगिक क्षेत्र बोम्मासांद्रा इलाके में स्थित है। अस्पताल के पहले चरण में पांच सौ बेड और दस ऑपरेशन थियेटर है।

हृदयरोग से अलग, यह अस्पताल बालरोग, तंत्रिकारोग, आंत्ररोग, सामान्य शल्य चिकित्सा, वृक्करोग, मूत्ररोग की चिकित्सा, रेडियोलॉजी, अंग-प्रत्यारोपण, सुक्ष्म-औषधि और मेडिकल-इमेजिग की सुविधा भी मुहैया कराता है। अस्पताल के पास एक रक्तालय (ब्लड बैंक) और एक प्रयोगशाला है। भारतीय अंतरिक्ष अनुसंधान संगठन यानी इसरो की मदद से नारायण हृदयालय ने टेलीमेडिसीन के क्षेत्र में भी अग्रणी स्थान कायम किया है। 

नारायण हृदयालय प्रतिदिन करीब चौबीस ओपन हर्ट सर्जरी और 25 केथेटेराइजेशन प्रक्रिया करता है। हृदयरोग में, इस अस्पताल को इंटरवेन्शनल कार्डियोलॉजी, इलेक्ट्रो-फिजियोलॉजी एवं बाPediatric Cardiology, and also performs cardiac surgeries like Coronary Artery Bypass Grafting (CABG), Redo Coronary Artery Bypass Grafting, the Dor procedure and the Ross procedure. A total of 13000 coronary bypass grafting operations have been performed in the hospital. The hospital also acts as a philanthropist by charging less than the normal cost for procedures like angiogram and cardiac surgery to people who cannot afford to pay the huge costs. Narayana Hrudayalaya also has 17 Coronary Care units which are based in remote cardiac hospitals but are linked to Narayana Hrudayalaya. These units handle emergency cardiac-related cases and the patients are controlled and stabilised before the cardiac specialists are consulted. The hospital also runs postgraduate programs for doctors and other medical staff on heartcare and also offers India's only formal training program for pediatric cardiac surgery.

The telemedicine service was started in the hospital in the year 2002 to cater mainly to the rural populace in the country. The telemedicine network of the hospital connects to countries like Malyasia, Mauritius and Pakistan; with most of the cases referred through telemedicine being cardiac ones. ECG reports, Audio/Visual data, CT scans, X-rays, MRIs and their analysis are exchanged via the telephone line, broadband connection or satellite. The hospital uses a telemedicine ECG machine manufactured by Schiller India, a Germany-based company. The telemedicine services provided by the hospital are free and more than 21000 cases have been referred using this service. Narayana Hrudayalaya is also a part of the "The Karnataka Telemedine Project" which was inaugurated on April 8, 2002 and links two rural hospitals in Saragur, Karnataka viz. the Chamarajnagar District Hospital and the Vivekananda Memorial Hospital with the Narayana Hrudayalaya.
