लिपियों की सूची

यहाँ विश्व की 'लेखन पद्धतियों' या लिपियों की वर्गीकृत सूची दी गई है। यह वर्गीकरण लिपियों के किसी विशेष गुण के आधार पर किया गया है जो उनकोअन्य लिपियों से अलग करता है।

पहले लिपि का नाम दिया गया है, इसके बाद उस लिपि में लिखी जाने वाली भाषाओं के नाम कोष्टक में दिए गए हैं। 


There are also symbol systems used to represent things other than language, or to represent constructed languages. Some of these are

Linear B and Asemic writing also incorporate ideograms.



In a syllabary, graphemes represent syllables or moras. (Note that the 19th century term "syllabics" usually referred to "abugidas" rather than true syllabaries.)






An abjad is a segmental script containing symbols for consonants only, or where vowels are "optionally" written with diacritics ("pointing") or only written word-initially.

A true alphabet contains separate letters (not diacritic marks) for both consonants and vowels.

"Linear" alphabets are composed of lines on a surface, such as ink on paper.

A featural script has elements that indicate the components of articulation, such as bilabial consonants, fricatives, or back vowels. Scripts differ in how many features they indicate.


Manual alphabets are frequently found as parts of sign languages. They are not used for writing "per se", but for spelling out words while signing.

These are other alphabets composed of something other than lines on a surface.

इन्हें वर्णाक्षरी (अल्फासिलैबरी) भी कहते हैं। ये 'खण्डात्मक' (segmental) लिपियाँ है जिनमें स्वर चिह्नों को दर्शाने के लिए व्यंजन पर कोई डायाक्रिटिकल चिह्न लगाया जाता है या कोई अन्य परिवर्तन/परिवर्धन कर दिया जाता है। भारत तथा दक्षिण-पूर्व एशिया की प्रायः सभी लिपियाँ इसी श्रेणी में आती हैं। ये सभी ऐतिहासिक रूप से ब्राह्मी परिवार की हैं।







Asemic writing is generally meaningless, though it sometimes contains ideograms or pictograms.

This section lists alphabets used to transcribe phonetic or phonemic sound; not to be confused with spelling alphabets like the ICAO spelling alphabet.

Alphabets may exist in forms other than visible symbols on a surface. Some of these are:


For example:





