चिल्का झील

चिल्का झील उड़ीसा प्रदेश के समुद्री अप्रवाही जल में बनी एक झील है। यह भारत की सबसे बड़ी एवं विश्व की दूसरी सबसे बड़ी समुद्री झील है। इसको चिलिका झील के नाम से भी जाना जाता है। यह एक अनूप है एवं उड़ीसा के तटीय भाग में नाशपाती की आकृति में पुरी जिले में स्थित है। यह 70 किलोमीटर लम्बी तथा 30 किलोमीटर चौड़ी है। यह समुद्र का ही एक भाग है जो महानदी द्वारा लायी गई मिट्टी के जमा हो जाने से समुद्र से अलग होकर एक छीछली झील के रूप में हो गया है। दिसम्बर से जून तक इस झील का जल खारा रहता है किन्तु वर्षा ऋतु में इसका जल मीठा हो जाता है। इसकी औसत गहराई 3 मीटर है।

इस झील के पारिस्थितिक तंत्र में बेहद जैव विविधताएँ हैं। यह एक विशाल मछली पकड़ने की जगह है। यह झील 132 गाँवों में रह रहे 150,000 मछुआरों को आजीविका का साधन उपलब्ध कराती है।

इस खाड़ी में लगभग 160 प्रजातियों के पछी पाए जाते हैं। कैस्पियन सागर, बैकाल झील, अरल सागर और रूस, मंगोलिया, लद्दाख, मध्य एशिया आदि विभिन्न दूर दराज़ के क्षेत्रों से यहाँ पछी उड़ कर आते हैं। ये पछी विशाल दूरियाँ तय करते हैं। प्रवासी पछी तो लगभग १२००० किमी से भी ज्यादा की दूरियाँ तय करके चिल्का झील पंहुचते हैं।

1981 में, चिल्का झील को रामसर घोषणापत्र के मुताबिक अंतरराष्ट्रीय महत्व की आद्र भूमि के रूप में चुना गया। यह इस मह्त्व वाली पहली पहली भारतीय झील थी।

एक सर्वेक्षण के मुताबिक यहाँ 45% पछी भूमि, 32% जलपक्षी और 23% बगुले हैं। यह झील 14 प्रकार के रैपटरों का भी निवास स्थान है। लगभग 152 संकटग्रस्त व रेयर इरावती डॉल्फ़िनों का भी ये घर है। इसके साथ ही यह झील 37 प्रकार के सरीसृपों और उभयचरों का भी निवास स्थान है। 

उच्च उत्पादकता वाली मत्स्य प्रणाली वाली चिल्का झील की पारिस्थिकी आसपास के लोगों व मछुआरों के लिये आजीविका उपलब्ध कराती है। मॉनसून व गर्मियों में झील में पानी का क्षेत्र क्रमश: 1165 से 906 किमी तक हो जाता है। एक 32 किमी लंबी, संकरी, बाहरी नहर इसे बंगाल की खाड़ी से जोड़ती है। सीडीए द्वारा हाल ही में एक नई नहर भी बनाई गयी है जिससे झील को एक और जीवनदान मिला है।

लघु शैवाल, समुद्री घास, समुद्री बीज, मछलियाँ, झींगे, केकणे आदि चिल्का झील के खारे जल में फलते फूलते हैं। 

भूवैज्ञानिक साक्ष्य इंगित करता है कि चिल्का झील अत्यंतनूतन युग (18 लाख साल से पूर्व 10,000 साल तक) के बाद के चरणों के दौरान बंगाल की खाड़ी का हिस्सा था।

चिल्का झील के ठीक उत्तर में खुर्दा जिले के गोग्लाबाई सासन गांव() में खुदाई भारतीय पुरातत्व सर्वेक्षण विभाग द्वारा आयोजित की गई। गोलाबाई गांव तीन चरणों में चिल्का क्षेत्र संस्कृति के एक दृश्य का सबूत प्रदान करता है: नवपाषाण युग (नियोलिथिक) (c. 1600 ईसा पूर्व), ताम्रपाषाण युग (c. 1400 ईसा पूर्व से c. 900 ईसा पूर्व) और लौह युग (c. 900 ईसा पूर्व से c. 800 ईसा पूर्व। Radiocarbon dating traced the earliest level of Golbai to 2300 BCE. The site is located on the left bank of the Malaguni River, a tributary of the Daya River, which flows into Chilika Lake. This location, which gave access to the sea via Chilika Lake, gives strong evidence of the maritime activities of this region. The recovery of many woodworking adzes and other artifacts shows that Golabai was a boat-building centre. Significantly, Golabai is the only excavated site in Odisha where boat building has been revealed. This also indicates that Chilka lake was very close to Golabai and it facilitated the maritime trade of people in the area during the ancient period.

Some ancient texts say the southern sector of Chilika was a major harbour for maritime commerce, when Kharavela (IAST: Khāravela, Devanagari: खारवेल, Odia: ଖାରବେଳ) (c. 209 BCE–after 170 BCE), the King of Kalinga, was known as the "Lord of the Sea".

Ptolemy (150 CE), the Greek geographer, referred to Palur as the port "Paloura", located close to the point of departure situated outside of the southern tip of the lake at Kantiagarh, from where ships bound for different parts of Southeast Asia sailed. After 639, the Chinese pilgrims Fa-Hien and Hiuen-Tsang mention a famous port ""Che-li-ta-loChing"" near the shore of the ocean which was a thoroughfare and resting place for seagoing traders and strangers from distant lands. This port was located at ‘Chhatragarh’ on the banks of Chilika Lake.

A fourth century legend, often told to explain the birth of Chilika, states that the pirate king, Raktabahhu, planned to attack Puri with a huge fleet of ships. To avoid detection, he stealthily anchored out of sight, off the mouth to the sea. The deception was revealed by ships' refuse floating to the shore, thus warning the town’s people, who escaped with all their possessions. Raktabahu felt betrayed when he found an abandoned town and directed his fury towards the sea
that had betrayed him. The sea parted to let the army march in, then surged back, drowned the army and formed the present lake.

Archeological excavations discovered Seventh century ship anchors and stone memoirs dedicated to battle heroes at a village named Kanas, about north of Chilika on the banks of Nuna river, which flows into the lake. This gives evidence of an historic naval engagement off the coast.

A 10th-century text, the Brahmanda Purana, mentions Chilika Lake as an important centre of trade and commerce, and a shelter for ships sailing to Java, Malaya, Singhala, China and other countries. This suggests that the lake was then deep enough for berthing seagoing ships and had a channel to the sea big enough for loaded trading ships embarking to Southeast Asia. The villagers around Chilika Lake still observe an annual festival called ""Bali Yatra"" (Journey to Bali).

In 1803, the British entered the shores of the lake, reached Puri and occupied Odisha with the help of Fateh Muhammed. Fateh Muhammed in turn was rewarded by the British with freehold of the areas of Malud and Parikud, of the present day Garh Krishnaprasad revenue block.

Over the years, poets including Kabibar Radhanath Ray and Pandit Godavarish Mishra, freedom fighters and Saints have extolled historicity of the lake as pertinent to its cultural, spiritual , religious and scenic aspects.
“Gopabandhu Das, a famous Odiya poet, became impatient to see the beauty of the march of colorful sights and sounds of Chilika lagoon while going by train. He asked the speeding train to stop for a moment so that he could enjoy the beauty. It is because of the beauty that arrests him much”.
यह झील बदलते माहौल वाले वातावरण में एक ज्वारनदमुखी डेल्टा प्रकार की अल्पकालिक झील है। भूवैज्ञानिक अध्धयनों के अनुसार की झील की पश्चिमी तटरेखा का विस्तार अत्यंतनूतन युग (Pleistocene Era) में हुआ था जब इसके उत्तरपूर्वी क्षेत्र समुद्र के अंदर ही थे। इसकी तटरेखा कालांतर में पूर्व की तरफ़ सरकने के प्रमाण इस बात से मिल जाते हैं कि कोर्णाक सूर्य मंदिर जिसका निर्माण कुछ साल पहले समुद्र तट पर हुआ था अब तट से लगभग दूर आ गया है।

चिल्का झील का जल निकासी कुण्ड पत्थर, चट्टान, बालू और कीचण के मिश्रण के आधार से निर्मित है। इसमें व्हिन्न प्रकार के अवसादी कण जैसे चिकनी मिट्टी, कीचड़, बालू, बजरी और शैलों के किनारे है लेकिन बड़ा हिस्सा कीचण का ही है। हर वर्ष लगभग १६ लाख मीट्रिक टन अवसाद चिल्का झील के किनारों पर दया नदी और अन्य धाराओं द्वारा जमा की जाती हैं। 

एक निराधार कल्पना के अनुसार पिछले 6,000–8,000 वर्षों के दौरान विश्वव्यापी समुद्री स्तर में बढोत्तरी हुई। 7,000 साल पहले इस प्रक्रिया में आई कमी की वजह से झील के दक्षिणी क्षेत्रों में पर रेतीले तटों का निर्माण हुआ। समुद्र स्तर में बढोत्तरी के साथ साथ तट का विस्तार होता रहा और इसने पूर्वोतर में समुद्र की तरफ बढते हुए चिल्का की समुद्री भूमि का निर्माण किया। (spit of Chilika) इस समुद्री भूमि के दक्षिण-पश्चिमी छोर पर मिले एक जीवाश्म बताता है कि झील का निर्माण 3,500–4,000 वर्ष पूर्व हुआ होगा। झील के उत्तर में तट की दिशा में तीखे बदलाव, तट पर बालू को बहाती तेज हवाएँ, लंबा त्टीय मोड़ (समुद्रतटवर्ती बहाव), विभिन्न उपक्षेत्रों में मजबूत ज्वार व नदी तरंगों की उपस्थिति और अनुपस्थिति इस समुद्री भूमि (spit) के विकास का कारण हैं।

दक्षिणी क्षेत्र में वर्तमान समुद्री स्तर से की उंचाई पर स्थित कोरल की सफ़ेद पट्टीयाँ यह दर्शाती हैं कि यह क्षेत्र कभी समुद्र के अंदर था और वर्तमान गहराई से कहीं ज्यादा गहरा था। बाहरी घेरेदार रेतीली भूमि पट्टी के क्रमविकास का घटनाक्रम यहाँ पाए जाने वाले खनिज पदार्थों के अध्धयन से पता किया गया है। यह अध्धयन झील की सतह के १६ नमूनों पर किया गया। नमूनों की मात्रा उपरी सतह के 40 और निचली सतह के 300 वर्ष तक पुराने होने के क्रम में 153 ± 3 mग्रे और 2.23 ± 0.07 ग्रे के बीच थी। 

चिल्का झील विशाल क्षेत्रों वाली कीचड़दार भूमि व छिछले पानी की खाड़ी है। पश्चिमी व दक्षिणी छोर पूर्वी घाट की पहाड़ियों के आंचल में स्थित हैं।

तमाम नदियाँ जो झील में मिट्टी व कीचड़ ले आती है झील के उत्तरी छोर को नियंत्रित करती हैं। बंगाल की खाड़ी में उठने वाली उत्तरी तरंगो से एक लंबा घेरेदार बालू-तट जिसे रेजहंस, कहा जाता है, बना और इसके परिणाम स्वरूप इस छिछली झील और इसके पूर्वी हिस्से का निर्माण हुआ। एक अल्पकालिक झील की वजह से इसका जलीय क्षेत्र गर्मियों में से लेकर बारिश के मौसम में तक बदलता रहता है।
इस झील में बहुत सारे द्वीप हैं। संकरी नहरों से अलग हुए बड़े द्वीप मुख्य झील और रेतीली घेरेदार भूमि के मध्य स्थित हैं। कुल क्षेत्रफल वाली नहरें झील को बंगाल की खाड़ी से जोड़ती हैं। इसमें छ: विशाल द्वीप हैं "परीकुड़, फुलबाड़ी, बेराहपुरा, नुआपारा, नलबाणा," और "तम्पारा"। ये द्वीप मलुद के प्रायद्वीप के साथ मिलकर पुरी जिला के "कृष्णाप्रसाद राजस्व क्षेत्र" का हिस्सा हैं। 

झील का उत्तरी तट खोर्धा जिला का हिस्सा है व पश्चिमी तट गंजम जिला का हिस्सा है। तलछटीकरण के कारण रेतीले तटबंध की चौड़ाई बदलती रहती है और समुद्र की तरफ़ मुख कुछ समय के लिये बंद हो जाता है। झील के समुद्री-मुख की स्थिति भी तेजी से उत्तर-पूर्व की तरफ खिसकती रहती है। नदी मुख जो 1780 में चौड़ा था चालीस साल बद सिर्फ़ जितना रह गया। क्षेत्रीय मछुआरों को अपना रोजगार क्षेत्र बचाने व समुद्र में जाने के लिये झील के मुख को खोद कर चौड़ा करते रहना पड़ता है।

पानी की गहराई सूखे मौसम में से और वर्षा ऋतु में से तक बदलती रहती है। समुद्र को जाने वाली पुरानी नहर की चौड़ाई जिसे मगरमुख के नाम से जाना जाता है अब है। झील मुख्यत: चार क्षेत्रों में बंटी हुई है, उत्तरी, दक्षिणी, मध्य व बाहरी नहर का इलाका। एक लंबी बाहरी नहर झील को बंगाल की खाड़ी से अराखुड़ा गाँव में जोड़ती है। झील का आकर किसी नाशपाती की तरह है और इसकी अधिकतम लंबाई और औसत चौड़ाई बनी रहती है।

तीन जल वैज्ञानिक उप-प्रणालियों को झील के जल विज्ञान को नियंत्रित करते हैं। The land based system comprises distributaries of the Mahanadi River on the northern side, 52 river channels from the western side and the Bay of Bengal on the eastern side. Two of the three southern branches of the Mahanadi River that trifurcates at Cuttack,
feed the lake. 61% () of the total fresh water inflow into the lake is contributed by these two branches.

The second drainage system which is non–perennial accounts for 39% (). The important rivers of this drainage system are the Kansari, the Kusumi, the Janjira and the Tarimi rivers. The annual total surface freshwater input to the lake is estimated to including direct precipitation over the lake contributing 
All the inland river systems disgorge an annual flow of about of freshwater which is estimated to carry 13 million metric tons of silt into the lake. On the north east a channel connects the lake to the Bay of Bengal.

A tropical monsoon climate prevails over the drainage basin area of the lake. The lake experiences South–west and North-east monsoons during June to September and November to December respectively with average annual rainfall of , with 72 rainy days. The maximum temperature of and minimum temperature of have been recorded. The wind speed varies from /hour with southerly and southwesterly direction due to the influence of the South–west monsoon and from north and north easterly direction during the rest of the months.

चिल्का विकास प्राधिकरण (सीडीए) पानी की गुणवत्ता माप का एक संगठित प्रणाली की स्थापना की और लिमनोलॉजी (अंतर्देशीय जल का अध्ययन करने वाले) की तहकीकात, झील के पानी की निम्नलिखित भौतिक-रासायनिक विशेषताओं को बतलाते है।

तटपर तटीय खिसकाव की वजह से आने वाले प्रतिकूल ज्वारीय लेनदेन की वजह से पानी के बहाव में कमी और झील के मुहाने की अवस्थिति में हर वर्ष लगातार बदलाव आ रहा है। इसकी वजह से तलछटी में जमा होने वाली गाद की अनुमानित मात्रा 100,000 मीट्रिक टन है। इन प्रतिकूल प्रभावों की वजह से व्यापक सुधारक कार्वाइयों की आवश्यकता है।

झील के विभिन्न भागों में अवसाद की विभिन्न मात्राएँ पायी गयीं। उत्तरी भाग में /वर्ष, मध्य भाग में /वर्ष और दक्षिणी भाग में /वर्ष के माप मिले। अवसाद के जमा होने की मात्रा दक्षिणी भाग की तुलना में उत्तरी व मध्य भाग में ज्यादा पाई गयी। 

इसकी समृद्ध जैव विविधता की वजह से, 1981 में चिल्का झील को रामसर घोषणापत्र के मुताबिक अंतरराष्ट्रीय महत्व की आद्र भूमि के रूप में चुना गया, जैसा कि तथ्यों के रूप में दिखाया है कि:

इन वर्षों में, झील के पारिस्थितिकी तंत्र को कई समस्याओं का सामना करना पड़ा और इनमे से कुछ खतरे निम्नलिखित है:
The rapid expansion of commercial aquaculture of prawn has contributed significantly to the decline of the lakes fisheries and bird population.

Concerted action was initiated by the Odisha State Government with support from the Government of India to adopt adaptive conservation and management actions.

By 1993, the problems in Chilika were so severe that the lake was put under "The Montreux Record" as the lake was considered to have “undergone, to be undergoing, or to be likely to undergo change in its ecological character brought about by human action”. The purpose was to stimulate remedial measures for the lake's conservation, supplemented with adequate monitoring. It was expected that such an action would benefit from the advice from Ramsar Advisory Mission and other identified technical assistance programmes.

सारांश में, नदी के ऊपर से गाद के नेतृत्व में वन्य जीवन और मत्स्य संसाधनों के निवास स्थान पर एक गंभीर नकारात्मक प्रभाव पड़ा जो सभी के लिए पानी की सतह क्षेत्र की सिकुड़न, लवणता और आक्रामक ताजा पानी जलीय खरपतवार की विपुल विकास की कमी।

In 1992, the Government of Odisha, concerned by the degradation of the lake's ecosystem and cognizant of significant numbers of people who were dependent upon the lake's resources, set up the Chilika Development Authority (CDA). The CDA was set up for restoration and overall development of the lake under the Indian Societies Registration Act as a parastatal body under the administrative jurisdiction of the Forest and Environment Department, with the following charter:

The governing body of the Authority is headed by the Chief Minister of Odisha State and has people’s representatives (Members of Parliament and Legislative Assembly), representatives of the fisherfolk communities and secretaries of the key departments, experts and eminent scientists as its members.

In 1998, an executive committee constituted with financial authority, supplemented with financial support from the Tenth and Eleventh Finance Commissions of the भारत सरकार, gave support to the management initiatives taken up by CDA. This facilitated a coordinated approach to plan and implement effective ameliorative management actions.

An Integrated Management Plan was implemented with financial support of Rs 570 million (US$12.7 million) out of “special problem grants” recommended by the Finance Commissions. Hydrobiological monitoring was supported under the Odisha Water Resources Consolidation Project of the World Bank, to the extent of Rs 10 million (US$220,000). A strong support network was created with 7 state government organizations, 33 NGOs, 3 national government ministries, 6 other organizations, 11 international organizations, 13 research institutions and 55 different categories of community groups.

In 2003, collaboration of Indian and Japanese experts led to a friendly relationship between Chilika lake and Saroma Lake in Japan called "Sister Wetlands".

Considering the threats faced by the lake, the National Wetlands, Mangroves and Coral Reefs Committee of the Ministry of Environment & Forests, भारत सरकार, also identified the lake as a priority site for conservation and management. The ameliorative actions taken by the CDA to restore the ecosystem and to improve the socio-economic conditions of the communities living around the lake and on its islands involved the following.

The most effective ameliorative action was the hydrological intervention of opening the new lake mouth and channel to the sea through the barrier beach at Satapura. This improved the spatial and temporal salinity gradients of the lake to maintain the unique characteristics of an estuarine eco-system. This intervention was undertaken after detailed scientific studies, including 3-dimensional mathematical modeling and hydraulics studies on a model prototype, were carried out by the Central Water and Power Research Station, Pune and National Institute of Oceanography, Goa. In September 2000, the desiltation of the channel connecting the lake to the sea and opening of a new mouth to restore the natural flows of water and salinity levels was carried out. These actions resulted in a notable increase in the lake's fish yield and a reduction of freshwater weeds. The new mouth reduced the length of the outflow channel by . Opening of the new mouth provided a favorable increased salinity regime throughout the lake with less fluctuations and improved water clarity. detailed results of this action can be seen in the references cited in External sources.

Other measures included:

In 2002, Chilika was taken out of the Montreux Record, in light of the improved conditions of the lake. Chilika lake is the first Ramsar site in Asia to be
removed from the Montreux record.



The ecological richness of the lake is of great value in preserving the genetic diversity because of the multiplicity of its habitat, flora and fauna. (Some are pictured in the photo gallery). The Zoological Survey of India (ZSI) surveyed the lake between 1985 and 1988 and identified 800 species of fauna, including many rare, endangered, threatened and vulnerable species, but excluding terrestrial insects.

The rare and threatened animal species identified are green sea turtle (EN), dugong (VU), Irrawaddy dolphin (VU), blackbuck (NT), Spoon billed sandpiper (CR), limbless skink and fishing cat (EN). 24 mammalian species were reported. 37 species of reptiles and amphibians are also reported.

Recent surveys revealed an overall 726 species of flowering plants belonging to 496 genera and 120 families. This represents about one –fourth of the vascular plant species of the Odisha state where some 2900 species altogether are found. Fabaceae is the most dominant plant family followed by Poaceae and Cyperaceae. Certain species were found to be characteristic of specific islands.
The flora is predominantly of aquatic and sub-aquatic plants. Overall 726 species of flowering plants belonging to 496 genera and 120 families have been recorded. Fabaceae is the predominant plant family followed by Poaceae and Cyperaceae. The species reported are leguminosae, poaceae, and cyperaceae; endemic cassipourea ceylanica; five species of seagrass, and more.
Important species identified are:.

Chilika Lake is the largest wintering ground for migratory birds, on the Indian sub-continent. It is one of the hotspots of biodiversity in the country. Some species listed in the IUCN Red List of threatened animals inhabit the lake for at least part of their life cycle.

White bellied sea eagles, greylag geese, purple moorhen, jacana, flamingos, egrets, gray and purple herons, भारतn roller, storks, white ibis, spoonbills, brahminy ducks, shovellers, pintails, and more.

Migratory water fowl arrive here from as far as the Caspian Sea, Baikal Lake and remote parts of Russia, Mongolia, Lakah, Siberia, Iran, Iraq, Afghanistan and from the Himalayas. A census conducted in the winter of 1997-98 recorded about 2 million birds in the lake.

In 2007, nearly 840,000 birds visited the lake, out of which 198,000 were spotted in Nalbana Island. On 5 Jan 2008, a bird census involving 85 wildlife officials counted 900,000 birds of which 450,000 were sighted in Nalabana. Removal of invasive species of freshwater aquatic plants, especially water hyacinth, due to restoration of salinity, is a contributing factor for the recent increasing attraction of birds to the lake.


Nalbana Island is the core area of the Ramsar designated wetlands of Chilika Lake. Nalbana means "a weed covered island" In the Odia language. It is a major island in the center of the lake and has an area of . The island gets completely submerged during the monsoon season. As the monsoon recedes in the winter, lake levels decrease and the island is gradually exposed, birds flock to the island in large numbers to feed on its extensive mudflats. Nalbana was notified in 1987 and declared a bird sanctuary in 1973 under the Wildlife Protection Act.

As per the Chilika Development Authority’s (CDA) updated data (2002), 323 aquatic species, which includes 261 fish species, 28 prawns and 34 crabs are reported out of which sixty five species breed in the lake. 27 species are freshwater fishes and two genera of prawns. The remaining species migrate to the sea to breed. 21 species of herrings and sardines of the family Clupeidae are reported.

Between 1998–2002, 40 fish species were recorded here for the first time and following the reopening of the lake mouth in 2000, six threatened species have reappeared, including:

For centuries fisher folk evolved exclusive rights of fishing through a complex system of partitioning the fisheries of the lake, harvested the lake in a relatively sustainable fashion and developed a large range of fishing techniques, nets and gear.

During the British rule, in 1897–98, fishermen community enjoyed exclusive fisheries rights in the lake. The fisheries of the lake were part of the Zamindari estates of Khallikote, Parikud, Suna Bibi, Mirza Taher Baig and the Chaudhary families of Bhungarpur and the Khas mahal areas of Khurda, lying within the kingdoms of the Rajas of Parikud and Khallikote. The zamindars (Landlords) leased out the fisheries exclusively to the local fisherfolk.

With the abolition of zamindari (land lordship) system in 1953, traditional fishing areas continued to be leased out to cooperatives of local fishermen. Fishing, particularly, prawn fishing, became increasingly remunerative with outside interest playing an important role. But in 1991, when the government of Odisha proposed a leasing policy that would have resulted in the auction of leases to the highest bidder, the Fishermen’s cooperatives challenged the order in court. The High Court of Odisha ordered the Government to enact changes that would protect the interests of traditional fishermen and since then no new leases have been reported. This has resulted in a chaotic regime in which powerful vested interests from outside dominate, and the local people have been subordinated.

Butter catfish and "Wallago attu" are the most common type of fish found in the lake. 11 species of fish, 5 species of prawn and 2 crab species are commercially important. The commercially important prawn are giant tiger prawn ("Metapenaeus monoceros"), Indian prawn ("Penaeus indicus"), "Metapenaeus monoceros" (Speckled shrimp), "Metapenaeus affinis" (Pink prawn) and "Metapenaeus dobson" (Kadal shrimp). Mangrove crab is the most important commercial crab. Fish landings in the lake, which fluctuated in the past, have recorded a remarkable recovery after the opening of the new mouth and dredging of silt –choked old mouth Magarmukh in 2000–2001, resulted in a better intermixing of the tidal influx from the sea and freshwater inflow from rivers. Against an all time lowest landing of fish and prawn of in 1995–96, the all-time high is reported to be during 2001–2002 resulting in an estimated per capita income for the fisher folk of Rs 19,575 (about US$392) during the year. Recently, the Government of Odisha have issued a notification banning the lease of Chilika Lake for Culture Fishery.


The Irrawaddy dolphin ("Orcaella brevirostris") is the flagship species of Chilika lake. Chilka is home to the only known population of Irrawaddy dolphins in India
and one of only two lagoons in the world that are home to this species.
It is classified as critically endangered, in five of the six other places it is known to live.

A small population of Bottlenose dolphins, also migrate into the lagoon from the sea. Chilika fishermen say that when Irrawaddy dolphins and bottlenose dolphins meet in the outer channel, the former get frightened and are forced to return toward the lake.

Some Irrawaddy dolphins used to be sighted only along the inlet channel and in a limited portion of the central sector of the lake. After the opening of the new mouth at Satapada in 2000, they are now well distributed in the central and the southern sector of the lake. The number of dolphins sighted has varied from 50 to 170. A 2006 census counted 131 dolphins and the 2007 census revealed 138 dolphins. Out of the 138 dolphins, 115 were adults, 17 adolescents and six calves. 60 adults were spotted in the outer channel followed by 32 in the central sector and 23 in the southern sector.

Dolphin tourism provides an important alternative source of income for many local residents. There are four tourist associations in Satapada employing three hundred and sixty 9-HP long-tail motor boats taking tourists to a area of the lake for dolphin watching. About 500 fishing families are involved in this business. The Odisha Tourism Department and the Dolphin Motorboat Association, an NGO at Satpada, report about 40,000 tourists visit Chilika every year for dolphin Watching. October–January and May–June are the peak season for tourists at Chilika, with a maximum 600-700 per day during December–January. The Dolphin Motorboat Association has 75 8-passenger motorboats for dolphin watching. Tourists pay Rs. 250 for 60–90 minutes per trip. According to the Association, most tourists see dolphins. Only 5% return disappointed. Besides the Association, the Odisha Tourism Department organises "dolphin-watch" for tourists. Even during monsoon, about 100 tourists/day visit the lake.

Boat based dolphin watching tours impact dolphin behavior and cause several accidental dolphin deaths each year. CDA conducts an annual census of dolphin deaths. They report 15 deaths in 2003-04, 11 in 2004-05, 8 in 2005-06 and 5 in 2006-07. 40% of the 2006-07 deaths were by mechanised boats.

Since 2004, the Whale and Dolphin Conservation Society has been conducting a science based community education project to conserve the Irrawaddy dolphins and Chilika Lake. They have determined the primary cause of mortality for this population of dolphins is floating gill nets and hook line fisheries and the secondary cause is boat strikes from increasing unmanaged tourism activities.

The Irrawaddy dolphins have a seemingly mutualistic relationship of co-operative fishing with the traditional fishermen. Fishermen recall when they would call out to the dolphins, to drive fish into their nets. Castnet fishing with the help of Irrawaddy dolphins in upper reaches of the Ayeyawady River has been well documented.

Nalaban Island: The 15 km Nalaban Island is within the Lagoon and is the core area of the Ramsar designated wetlands. It was declared a bird sanctuary under the Wildlife Protection Act in 1973. It’s the heart of the park where one can seen thousands of birds descending during the migratory season. The island disappears during monsoon season due to inundation, and post-monsoon, the island emerges again.

The vast lake harbours 225 species of fish, a wide variety of phytoplankton, algae and aquatic plants, and also supports over 350 species of non-aquatic plants. The other areas where high concentrations of birds are recorded are Gerasara, Parikud Island, and the western shores of the Northern sector.

Chilka Lake is one of the best bird watching spots in India, and is also popular for fishing and angling.

Puri: This holy city is famous for the late 11th century built Jagannath temple. The other major attraction here is the beach, from where you can witness the glorious sunrise and equally mesmerising sunset. It’s said that a visit to Puri is incomplete without visiting Chilika Lagoon.

The Nirmaljhara Waterfall: This is an ideal place for pitching your picnic tent. The beautiful waterfall is located nearly 12 km from Chilika Lagoon.

Satpada: This place is located at a distance of around from Puri, on the eastern side of the Chilika Lake. This place is surrounded by lagoons from the three sides, which makes this place an amazing tourist spot for nature lover.

The open air and scenic natural flora and fauna of the lake are an attraction for eco-tourism. This is expected to provide a degree of alternate employment to the local community and generate environmental awareness, among local residents as well as visitors, about the conservation and wise use of the lake’s natural resources. The locations within the lake identified for such activity are:

The lake is well connected by road to Chennai and Kolkata through National Highway No 5. Satpara town on the eastern bank of the lake is about by road southwest of the city of Puri and at a distance of from Bhubaneswar, the capital of Odisha, which is also the nearest airport.

A broad gauge railway line of the South Eastern Railway from Kolkata skirts along the western bank of the lake passing through Balugaon, Chilika and Rambha stations.

Within the lake precincts, Odisha Tourism Development Corporation Ltd (OTDC) and the Revenue Department of the state government offer boat cruises. Private operators also provide country boats on hire to various islands in the lake.

There are OTDC Guest houses at Barkul, Rambha, Satapada & several hotels at Balugaon. Before entering into the Nalbana Bird Sanctuary one has to obtain an entry permit. The entry permit has to be produced at entry/exit points, at check gates as and whenever requested by officials.
