सिफ़ी

सिफ़ी लिमिटेड "(अर्थात सिफ़ी सीमित देयता कंपनी)" (पूर्व नाम सत्यम इन्फ़ोवे लिमिटेड) एक प्रमुख अन्तर्जाल सेवा प्रदाता कंपनी है, यह चेन्नई,भारत मे बसी है। इसकी मुख्य सेवायें निम्न हैं:
भी आता है।
सिफ़ी का प्रवेशद्वार www.sify.com ने Indiaworld.com का अधिक्रमण भी कर रखा है। 

सिफी भारत की मुख्य अन्तर्जाल सेवा प्रदाता कंपनी है। इसे विश्व भर की It was rated as one of "The ten top technology companies world-wide recommended for investment" by Fortune in 1999.

Sify was an early pioneer in India in setting up internet portals (then www.satyam-infoway.com; now www.sify.com). When internet access was opened to private sector (until then the state run VSNL had a monopoly in providing internet access), Sify became the first private sector player to offer internet access. Sify's business model was interesting. It leased international bandwidth from global vendors, domestic connectivity from telecom players and set up last mile connectivity by multiple methods: wi-fi connections using roof top antennae, copper connections using phone lines or cable tv connections. Sify also started providing internet network connectivity for business enterprises in India. Sify took internet to the masses in India by setting up a chain of franchised internet cafes (today a network of over 3,300+ cybercafes) becoming the largest chain of cybercafes in India.

Sify acquired a competitor portal www.indiaworld.com for $115 million (ranked second in valuation of a portal in India after investment by venture capital firms in Rediff a few months prior to the deal).

Sify is now owned by Mr. Raju Vegesna, the enterpreneur who has made several billion dollars with his other companies Serverworks and Serverengines. He took over the company in June of 2006 after Mr. Ramaraj quit as the company's CEO. Under the leadership of Mr. Vegesna, the company has earned a maiden profit after 10 years of its inception.

As of March 31st 2006, it has 171 points of presence serving more than 250 cities in the country .

