बैंकिंग कॉरस्पॉण्डेण्ट

बैंकिंग कॉरस्पॉण्डेण्ट योजना भारत में वित्तीय समावेशन हेतु चलाई जा रही भारतीय रिज़र्व बैंक की एक महत्वाकाँक्षी योजना है। इस योजना की शुरुआत जनवरी 2006 में हुई। 

गाँव-गाँव में बैंकों की शाखाएँ खोलना बैंकों के लिए फायदे का सौदा नहीं है क्योंकि कम जनसंखया के कारण लाभ कम होता है लेकिन लागत पूरी आती है। इस बात को ध्यान में रखते हुए जनवरी 2006 में भारतीय रिज़र्व बैंक ने बैंको को दूर दराज के क्षेत्रों तक बैंकिंग व वित्तीय सेवाएँ पहुँचाने के लिए बिचौलिए के रूप में सेवाप्रदाताओं का उपयोग करने की अनुमति दी जिन्हें "बिज़नेस फैसिलिटेटर" (Business Facilitators, BFs) अथवा "बैंकिंग (या बिज़नेस) कॉरस्पॉण्डेण्ट" (Banking (or Business) Correspondents, BCs) नाम दिया गया। 
This was with the objective of ensuring greater financial inclusion and increasing outreach of the banking sector. As per the current guidelines, NGOs/ MFIs set up under Societies/ Trust Acts, societies registered under Mutually Aided Cooperative Societies Acts or the Cooperative Societies Acts of States, Section 25 companies that are stand alone entities or in which NBFCs, banks, telecom companies and other corporate entities or their holding companies did not have equity holdings in excess of 10 per cent, post offices and retired bank employees, ex-servicemen and retired government employees can act as BCs of banks. The BCs are allowed to conduct banking business as agents of the banks at places other than the bank premises. In recent times, however, there were demands from various sectors that the eligible entities to act as BCs be enlarged, with a view to facilitating increased outreach of the banking system. Following this, as announced in the Annual Policy 2009-10, the Reserve Bank constituted a working group to review the Business Correspondent (BC) Model. The Working Group included officials from select commercial banks and the Reserve Bank as members and Shri P. Vijaya Bhaskar, CGM in-Charge, Department of Banking Operations and Developments as the Chairman.

योजना का विस्तार
A Reserve Bank of India Working Group has recommended the following new entities for appointment of Business Correspondents (BCs) for banks in rural and semi-urban areas:

i) Individual kirana/medical/fair price shop owners
ii) Individual Public Call Office (PCO) operators
iii) Agents of Small Savings Schemes of Government of India/Insurance Companies
iv) Individuals who own petrol pumps
v) Retired teachers
vi) Authorised functionaries of well run Self Help Groups (SHGs) linked to banks
vii) Non deposit taking NBFCs (non-banking finance companies) in the nature of loan companies whose micro finance portfolio is not less than 80 per cent of their loan outstanding in the financially excluded districts as identified by the Committee on Financial Inclusion (Chairman: Dr. C. Rangarajan)
