सिकन्दर वारसी

"This artical by S@Z Group of Engineering (a site designer of Warsi)"

"S.M.S Warsi" full form, Sayyid Muhammad Sikander Warsi (Urdu: سید محمّد سکندر وارثی Hindi: सय्यिद मुहम्मद सिकन्दर वारसी) Best known as Sikander Warsi (Urdu: سکندر وارثی, Hindi: सिकन्दर वारसी) was born 18 January 1989 (10 Jumada al-Thani 1409 Hijri) Shastri Park in Delhi, India. The name given during his Aqeeqah was Naseem. and he is bait in Silsila Qadiriyya. Now his real name is "Sayyid Muhammad Naseem Qadiri". Sikander Warsi is a Website Designer and Blog Expert, He is a Sunni Muslim and he is Sayyid (Ahl-e-Bait) by Cast. He is owner of the websites of Sayyid Zada Group. Sikander Warsi follows Imam Abu Hanifa means he is Sunni, Hanafi. And he believe on Ahl e Sunnat Wal Jamaat and loves Alahazrat Imam Ahmed Raza Khan Barelvi.

Sikander Warsi was born into a Sunni Muslim family in Delhi,<BR> He was born in Delhi and Education also in Delhi. Sikander Warsi kindergarten started in Zakir Hussain College. At the age of 12 he joined T.P.C.E.C(Private tuition center) where he continued his studies form a Govt. School at Shastri Park (Delhi). He was selected in his tuition center(T.P.C.E.C) as a president. Sikander Warsi’s cleared his 10th grade in 14 year of age. He has always been the younger boy in the class because of his Hairstyle. <BR> and now he is doing a job in a Valuation company in Devika Tower (Ghaziabad). After office he spends his more time in learn & Read and Teach Hadees, Fiqh, Tafseer and more...

Sikander Warsi’s cleared his 10th grade in 14 year of age. Then he went Govt. Sr. Sec. School for 12th. After 12 he join Zakir Hussain College (Eve.). But in college he did not read much, And had to leave college. To continue his further education he got admission in Delhi University. For B.A. he is doing a job in Valuation company named Adroit Technical Services Pvt Ltd in Devika Tower. Sikander Warsi is a Web designer, and Bloger(blog expert) and a Urdu Poet(Naat Khawan) also.

Sikander Warsi was born into a Sunni Muslim family in Delhi, he lives with his family in his owner house named Warsi House in Delhi. His father "Sayyid Muhammad Ilyas Warsi" and mother "Rahees Jahan". He has two brother Named "Waseem Warsi" and "Samad Warsi"(Faiz) and three Sisters, Sikander Warsi's family is Talib of Waris Pak of Deva Sharif. Then they called Warsi, But is bait in Qadiri Razavi Silsila. His family is a Sunni (Barelvi) and believe in Auliya, and Mazarat, and Niyaz-Fatiha, means his family also believe on Maslak-e-Alahazrat.

Sikander Warsi is a dogmatic Muslim for Sharia. and follow Sunni Sufism. He is a follower of Abu Hanifa and he follows the Qadiri Sufism order, 
<BR>
Sayyid Zada (Hindi:सय्यिद ज़ादा, Urdu:سیّد زادہ) is a Islamic Organization, This is Sunni Barelvi Movment, This group provide free Information About Fiqh Hanafi <BR> 
Sayyid Zada Official Website named www.sayyidzada.com.co.in is a Hindi Islamic website under running by Sikander Warsi. On this website you can see and read Hadees, Ahle sunnat view in the light of Quran & Hadees, and read all Question and answers by Sikander Warsi from Ahle Sunnat Group.(Whatsapp Group) and you can also read Mas'ale on Wuzu, Ghusl, Namaz, Roze in Hindi, and you can read complete (Naatia Deewan) Hadaiq e Bakhshish (by Ahmed Raza) & Nazrana e Bakhshish (by Sikander Warsi) in Hindi first time on website.

Masail e Shariat is a Fiqhi book by him on Fiqh Hanafi. in volume 1 of Masail e Shariat has 700 questions and there answers by Warsi, question came from a whatsapp group (Ahle Sunnat) run by him,

Nazrana e Bakhshish (Hindi:नज़राना ए बख्शिश, Urdu:نذرانہء بخشش) is a (unpublished) Poetry book (Naatia Kalam) of Sikander Warsi. that specifically praises the Islamic prophet Muhammad (صلاللٌاہ علیہ وسلم). Many of the famous scholars in the earlier days of Islam wrote Naat. People who recite Naat are known as Naat-Khua'an or Sana'a-Khua'an.There are two examples of Asha'ar from Nazrana e Bakhshish By Sikander Warsi. 

<BR>

More Sunni Poetry Books are:
Slogan: "We do not share our privacy".
SAZ Group of engineering (S@A Group). This is a personal group of Sikander Warsi. Sikader's all websites & blogs created by SAZ.