खारिया

खारिया भारत के वृहद जन-जातीय समुदायों मे से एक है

खारिया समुदाय तीन वर्गों में विभाजित है। दूध खारिया, ढेलकी खारिया व हिल खारिया। प्रथम दो जातियाँ औस्ट्रो-एसियाटिक खारिया भाषा बोलती है तथा हिल खारिया लोगो ने अपनी भाषा इंडो-आर्यन खारिया थार मे परिवर्तित कर दी है।

दूध खारिया व ढेलकी खारिया सम्मिलित रूप से एक जन जाति हैं। इनके पूर्वज रूईदास पटना के निवासी थे। एक अहीर राजा द्वारा खारिया लोगों पर आक्रमण के फलस्वरूप वे भाग कर छोटा नागपुर में आ बसे थे।

हिल खारिया भारत में अलग अलग राज्यों में पाये जाते हैं। उड़ीसा मे वे मयूरभंज जिले के जसीपुर व करंजिया भागों मे पाये जाते हैं। झारखंड मे वे पूर्वी सिंघभूम,गुमला, सिंदेगा जिलों में केन्द्रित है, जहाँ वे मुसबानी, दुमरिया व चकुलिया भागों मे बहुतायत में हैं। पश्चिम बंगाल के पश्चिम मिदनापुर, बांकुरा व पुरुलिया में उनका निवास है। पुरुलिया में वे बहुसंख्यक हैं।

The Hill Kharia are also called Pahari (meaning “Hill”) Kharia, Savara/Sabar, Kheria, Erenga, or Pahar. Outsiders call them Kharia but they call themselves as Sabar. They are called “Pahari (Hill) Kharia” because they live in the midst of forest and depend upon forest produces.

There are several gotras (clans) among the Hill Kharia such as Golgo, Bhunia, Sandi, Gidi, Dehuri, Pichria, Nago, Tolong, Suya, Dhar, Tesa, Kotal, Kharmoi, Digar, Laha, Saddar, Sikari, Rai, Khan, Dolai, Sal, Alkosi and Khiladi. Golgo seems to be dominant one because in every village that clan is spelt out first whenever their clans were asked.

They mainly inhabit Bihar, Madhya Pradesh, Odisha and West Bengal. A few families can be found in Assam and Andaman islands. According to 1981 census, their population in Bihar is 141,771, in Odisha it is 144,178, and in Madhya Pradesh it is 6892.

The Kharia who were under Zamindar during British rule are now land owning peasants in independent India. All Kharia speak their traditional dialect. The Language speken by them is a branch of Munda language. They are very close to the nature and culture of the tribe is influenced by its ecological and cultural surroundings.

The Hill Kharia have preserved their traditional dress pattern and rest of the Kharia have been influenced by the modern contacts and changed their dressing style. Traditionally, they wear Dhoti called Bhagwan. women wear saree falling up to the ankles. A part of the saree covers their bosom. The traditional dress is nowadays going out of use. Both men and women wear ornaments generally made of Brass, Nickel, Aluminium, Silver and rarely of Gold. Dudh Kharia women prefer Gold ornaments.

Different levels of economic developments on sectional basis exist among Kharia. The Hill Kharia is a food gathering, hunting and labourer community. The Dhelkis are agricultural labourers and agriculturalists, while Dudh Kharia are exclusively agriculturists in their primary economy.

Kharia people are skilled in cottage industries.

Kharia are said to be the great dancers. Youth of both sexes dance together. sometimes they form two groups each of males and females and sing one after the other. It is like conversion is going on between boys and girls in the form of the song.
The following dance patterns are prevalent among Kharias-
Hario, Kinbhar, Halka, Kudhing and Jadhura.


