भारतीय मूल के अंग्रेजी शब्दों की सूची

यह अंग्रेज़ी भाषा के उन शब्दों की सूची है जिनका मूल भारतीय भाषाएँ हैं अथवा भारतीय भाषाओं से जनित अंग्रेजी शब्दों की सूची।

Hindi is an Indo-Aryan language that evolved from the Sanskrit language, and is thus a much simpler version of it. It is also called "Standard Hindi" the language spoken in the northern belt of India. Standard Hindi is one of the 22 scheduled languages of India.

English language took many word from Hindi Some of them are as:-

1)- Jungle:- and Indian word taken directly as it is pronounced with the same meaning " Forest" Both the language share the same meaning

2)- Juggernaut:- which is the name of Lord Krishna as he is worshiped in one of the 4 major Dham (Sacred Place of worshiping and devotion) named jaggan Nath Puri in India. It was taken with a different meaning a slightly different meaning. First was a force which could ruin anything or ravage, devastate anything that comes in it's way. Second meaning is a Blind devotion that needs cruel sacrifices in any form.

3)-bangalore (transitive verb):- To fire a worker because his or her job is getting outsourced to an offshore company overseas. It's a City in India by the name Banglore, which was taken verbatim as a verb. This city has most numbers of IT engineers and it started outsourcing American IT jobs.

4)-Trignometry:- This is an argument that This word is taken from Indian word trikonmiti that stands for trignometry and is an ancient word found in sthapatya upveda one of the oldest books written in the world. So it's but natural that it was the most ancient origin of this word. But it might have migrated in other languages to move in English

5)- Bandana:- It comes from Indian word Bandhna that means to tie anything; a verb.

6)- shampoo:- There is a Hindi verb chumpi which means a head massage with oil, a proper treatment of hypertension. It results in a noun Chumpoo the one who gets such a message or as in a derogatory term one who used excessive oil on hairs or is fond of his hair. It gives a very fashionable word in English which we can use freely.

7)- Sentry:- In Hindi as in Sanskrit Santri is prime minister of any state, one who is subordinate only to king and no one else, one who is advisory of the king and plans action of the state. That word is called to derive the word sentry meaning A guard, especially a soldier posted at a given spot to prevent the passage of unauthorized persons.

8)- Aryan:- is derived from the Sanskrit ‘arya’. It is also present in Latin (Ariana) and Greek (Aria), but is believed to ultimately root from Sanskrit. In the 18th century in Sanskrit, the word meant ‘speaker of the North Indian language’. In the 1830s Aryan was expanded to mean ‘speaker of Indo-European languages’ since it was discovered that Iranians also used the same word for the same meaning. In Nazi Germany, the main meaning of Aryan was considered to be ‘non-Jewish’ and Aryans were recognized by features such as blonde hair and blue eyes. Hindu religion today is only the leftover of the most ancient civilization of the world, note the word the most, Aryan. Even Swami vivekanand didn't want that religion to die uselessly therefore he founded an organisation called Arya Samaj (Society of Aryan). see http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Aryan for more information

9)-Cheetah:- This is again taken as on base word. It has the same meaning as Hindi word Cheetah Tiger.

10)- Chit:- This word is taken from Indian word Chitthi which means letter. In english it means a short letter or a note by someone.

11)-Bangles:- This is a form of Indian ornaments that are very famous in India. you can see all the women wearing them. and they are so long rooted in indian civilization that you can trace them in Indian rituals, traditions, and sacred customs too. It comes from the word Bangdi with the same meaning a bracelet.

12)-Juggernaut :- Something, such as a belief or an institution, that elicits blind and destructive devotion or to which people are ruthlessly sacrificed.
From the name of the Hindu deity Krishna - Juggernath/Jaganath

13)-Pariah :- A social outcast. An untouchable
From the Tamil caste name, "Pariah" which means 'hereditary drummer'

14)-Khaki:-From the Urdu word khaki - dusty or dust colored and/or from the Persian word khak - dust

15)-Pyjama:-from Persian (Pai- leg + jamah - garment)
Ginger
Tamil - inji (ginger) + ver (root)

16)-Catamaran:-Tamil kattumaram: kattu- to tie + maram- wooden log - Tied wood

17)-Loot:-From Sanskrit loptrum/lotrum - plunder

Pretty interesting, right ?!

There are lots of word that can be listed here I have come to know a few from a site and I am listing them here just for your reference:-

1) ahimsa - Sanskrit

2) anaconda – Sinhalese

3) ashram - Sanskrit

4) avatar-Hindi 

5) Ayurveda - Sanskrit 

6) bandicoot - Telugu

7) bazaar - Urdu 

8) bhakti - Sanskrit 

9) Brahmin - Hindi 

10) bungalow - Hindi 

11) cashmere - Sanskrit 

12) cash – Tamil

13) catamaran – Tamil

14) cheroot - Tamil

15) chai - Hindi 

16) chakra - Sanskrit
17) coir - Tamil 

18) cot - Hindi

19) cummerbund - Hindi 

20) curry - Tamil 

21) Deva / Devi - Sanskrit 

22) dharma - Hindi 

23) garam masala – Hindi / Urdu 

24) ghats – Hindi / Bengali 

25) godown - Tamil 

26) guru - Hindi 

27) Gurudwara – Hindi

28) jungle - Hindi 

29) jute - Bengali 

30) kabaddi - Tamil 

31) karma - Hindi 

32) khadi - Hindi 

33) khaki - Urdu 

34) kismat - Hindi

35) loot – Hindi

36) Mahatma - Sanskrit 

37) musk – Sanskrit

38) moksha - Sanskrit 

39) mahout – Hindi

40) mulligatawny – Tamil

41) mango – Tamil

42) namaste - Hindi 

43) nirvana - Sanskrit 

44) pajamas - Hindi 

45) pariah - Tamil 

46) pandal - Tamil 

47) pongal - Tamil 

48) palanquin – Sanskrit

49) poppadom - Tamil 

50) pucca - Sanskrit 

51) pundit - Hindi 

52) raga - Hindi 

53) raj – Sanskrit

54) rupee - Hindi 

55) rice- Tamil

56) sari – Hindi

57) swastika – Sanskrit

58) sambar - Tamil 

59) swami - Hindi 

60) sentry – Hindi

61) teapoy - Hindi

62) thug – Hindi

63) teak – Malayalam / Tamil 

64) Veda - Sanskrit 

65) verandah – Hindi

66) yoga - Hindi

67) karizma- hindi

and for more detail move on to this page

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_English_words_of_Hindi_or_Urdu_origin



