दैनिक जलते दीप

दैनिक जलते दीप एक लोकप्रिय भारतीय हिन्दी समाचार पत्र है जो राजस्थान के जोधपुर व जयपुर ज़िले से प्रकाशित होता है तथा इसका मुख्यालय जोधपुर में है। दैनिक जलतेदीप राजस्थान के दूसरे सबसे बड़े नगर जोधपुर से सन् 1969 से निरंतर प्रकाशित हो रहा है। केन्द्र सरकार के डीएवीपी व राज्य सरकार के विज्ञापनों हेतु दैनिक जलतेदीप को राज्य स्तरीय समाचार पत्र की मान्यता प्रदान की हुई है। जोधपुर के इस सबसे पुराने दैनिक की राजस्थान प्रदेश के पश्चिमी अंचल में विशेष लोकप्रियता एवं प्रभाव है। बारह पृष्ठाें में ऑफसेट व फोटों कम्पोजिंग पद्धति से मुद्रित तथा राज्य के अधिकांश जिलों में इसका नित्य वितरण होता है। 26 जनवरी वर्ष 1999 से प्रकाशित इसका जयपुर संस्करण राजधानी जयपुर एवं आस पास में रहने वाले पश्चिमी राजस्थान के लोगों का प्रतिनिघि संवाहक है। अनुभवी संपादकों की टीम एवं अपने स्वयं के दिल्ली, मुम्बई, जयपुर, बीकानेर, उदयपुर, अजमेर, कोटा, कार्यालयों से आधुनिक संचार सुविघाओं से जुड़ा दैनिक जलतेदीप जयपुर आधारित प्रमुख दैनिकों की भांति ही राजस्थान का एक सम्पूर्ण अखबार है।

Dainik Jalte Deep established in 1969 from Jodhpur. It is the one amongst a few Newspapers who got the state level reorganization. It is well known as the ‘Voice of Rajasthan and has wide reach in Urban area of this region. It is very close to the minds of local people due to its clean, bold & constructive journalism.  Our interesting content and exclusive reading material makes Jalte Deep very different choice in Rajasthan.  Various leading corporate clients and media agencies are showing their trust on us.  Infect Various corporate has launched their print ad campaign in Rajasthan with JALTE DEEP. This shows the great potentialities in Jalte Deep and Rajasthan. In Jalte Deep we never compromise and always committed to provide reliable, authentic and quality news to our readers. Jalte Deep is a regular newspaper publishing house and published from Jodhpur and Jaipur simultaneously, it has reached new heights and established a milestone in the field of true journalism.

Jalte Deep is the pioneer daily newspaper which was published on First on Rotary (1978), First on Offset (1984), First on computerized, DTP (1988) & First on 8 pages shape (1989). It is also the first provider of Wages, Salary, Allowance, ESI, PF facility as according to Palekar Award & Bachhawat Award from the year 1981 to all Journalists.

Jalte Deep is the only publication giving one full page in local Marwari language. No other publication gives this kind of material which is widely reads.

Dainik Jalte Deep is having credit of establishing Journalism award well known as ‘MANAK ALANKARAN’ from the year 1981. So far 33 journalists have been honored by this award.

Dainik Jalte Deep is the first newspaper in the country to initiate social concerns by deciding not to carry advertisements of Zarda, Gutkha, Bidi, Cigarettes, Pan Masala, Wine & puzzles from 1997.

Its associated publication ‘Manak’  no.1 Rajasthani language monthly home magazine since 1981. It has unique readership all over India and abroad.  No other magazine in any language, published from anywhere else has such wide reach over this most solvent community. The U.S.P of Manak makes it popular not only in urban/rural readers of Rajasthan but also it attracts lacs of Pravasi Rajasthanis reside all over World.

Sister concern Manak TV has produced numerous programmed for Jaipur-DD including role of Rajasthan in freedom struggle to name a few.
