चीनी राशि

इस चीनी राशि वर्गीकरण है योजना प्रदान करती है कि एक जानवर के लिए प्रत्येक वर्ष में एक दोहरा बारह साल का चक्र है। 12 साल के चक्र की चीनी राशि चक्र के लिए एक सन्निकटन है 11.86 वर्ष के चक्र में बृहस्पति सबसे बड़ा ग्रह सौर प्रणाली के. यह है एक योजना और व्यवस्थित योजना के भविष्य की कार्रवाई संबंधित है कि प्रत्येक वर्ष के लिए एक जानवर और उसके प्रतिष्ठित गुण के अनुसार एक 12 साल का चक्र है। यह लोकप्रिय बनी हुई है में कई पूर्व एशियाई देशों सहित चीन, वियतनाम, कोरिया, जापान, फिलीपींस, थाईलैंड और ताइवान.

पहचान करने के लिए इस योजना का उपयोग कर शब्द "राशि" को दर्शाता है कई सतही समानता के लिए पश्चिमी राशि चक्र: दोनों समय के चक्र में विभाजित 12 भागों में, प्रत्येक लेबल में कम से कम बहुमत के उन भागों के साथ, जानवरों के नाम और प्रत्येक व्यापक रूप से के साथ संबंधित हैं कि एक संस्कृति ascribing एक व्यक्ति के व्यक्तित्व या घटनाओं में उसके या उसके जीवन के लिए माना जाता के प्रभाव व्यक्ति की विशेष रूप से रिश्ते के लिए चक्र। फिर भी, वहाँ प्रमुख मतभेद रहे हैं: चीनी 12-भाग चक्र से मेल खाती है साल के बजाय महीने. चीनी राशि चक्र का प्रतिनिधित्व करती है 12 जानवरों, जबकि संकेत के कुछ में पश्चिमी राशि नहीं कर रहे हैं, पशुओं के बावजूद निहितार्थ के ग्रीक व्युत्पत्ति की "राशि". जानवरों की चीनी राशि नहीं कर रहे हैं के साथ जुड़े तारामंडल फैला द्वारा क्रांतिवृत्त विमानहै।

राशि चक्र परंपरागत रूप से शुरू होता है के हस्ताक्षर के साथ चूहाहै। निम्नलिखित बारह राशियों (प्रत्येक के साथ जुड़े अपने सांसारिक शाखा) में आदेश और उनकी विशेषताओं.

जेड सम्राट
में चीनी ज्योतिष के पशु संकेत द्वारा सौंपा वर्ष का प्रतिनिधित्व करते हैं, क्या आप दूसरों के अनुभव के रूप में किया जा रहा है या कैसे आप अपने आप को पेश. यह एक आम गलत धारणा है कि जानवरों के द्वारा सौंपा वर्ष ही संकेत मिल रहे हैं और कई पश्चिमी विवरण की चीनी ज्योतिष आकर्षित पूरी तरह से इस सिस्टम पर. वास्तव में, वहाँ भी कर रहे हैं पशुओं के लक्षण द्वारा सौंपा महीने (बुलाया भीतरी पशु), दिन (सच कहा जाता है जानवरों) और घंटे (बुलाया गुप्त जानवरों)।

जबकि एक व्यक्ति दिखाई दे सकता है किया जा करने के लिए एक अजगर है, क्योंकि वे में पैदा हुए थे वर्ष के ड्रैगन, वे भी हो सकता है एक सांप आंतरिक रूप से, एक बैल वास्तव में, और एक बकरी गोपनशीलता.

के बीच एक संघर्ष में एक व्यक्ति की राशि चक्र पर हस्ताक्षर और कैसे वे रहते हैं में जाना जाता है के रूप में ताई सुई या काई सुई.

के भीतर चार स्तंभोंमें, वर्ष के स्तंभ का प्रतिनिधित्व करने के बारे में जानकारी व्यक्ति की पारिवारिक पृष्ठभूमि और समाज या रिश्ते के साथ उनके दादा-दादी है। व्यक्ति की उम्र कर सकते हैं भी हो आसानी से deduced से व्यक्ति के हस्ताक्षर, वर्तमान संकेत के वर्ष और व्यक्ति की कथित उम्र (, मध्य 20, 40,, और इतने पर). उदाहरण के लिए, एक व्यक्ति है जो एक बाघ है या तो 12, 24, 36, या 48 साल की उम्र में 2010 में, वर्ष के टाइगर. में 2011, वर्ष के खरगोश, उस व्यक्ति को एक वर्ष है।

निम्न तालिका से पता चलता है के 60 साल के चक्र मिलान करने के लिए पश्चिमी कैलेंडर के लिए साल 1924-2043 (देखें Sexagenary चक्र लेख साल के लिए 1804-2043). के sexagenary चक्र में शुरू होता है lichun 'के बारे में 4 फरवरी' के अनुसार कुछ ज्योतिषीय स्रोत है। 

के भीतर चार स्तंभों, इस महीने के स्तंभ का प्रतिनिधित्व करने वाले व्यक्ति के बारे में जानकारी के माता-पिता या बचपन. कई चीनी ज्योतिषियों पर विचार इस महीने के स्तंभ के लिए सबसे महत्वपूर्ण में से एक का निर्धारण करने में परिस्थितियों के एक वयस्क जीवन.

12 जानवरों को भी जुड़े हुए हैं करने के लिए पारंपरिक चीनी कृषि कैलेंडर, जो चलाता है, के साथ बेहतर जाना जाता चंद्र कैलेंडर। के बजाय महीने, इस कैलेंडर में बांटा गया है 24 दो सप्ताह के क्षेत्रों के रूप में जाना जाता "सौर शर्तों"है। प्रत्येक जानवर से जुड़ा हुआ है, इनमें से दो सौर शर्तों अवधि के लिए करने के लिए इसी तरह पश्चिमी महीने. के विपरीत 60 वर्ष चंद्र कैलेंडर है, जो भिन्न हो सकते हैं के रूप में ज्यादा के रूप में एक महीने के संबंध में पश्चिमी कैलेंडर, कृषि कैलेंडर से भिन्न होता है केवल एक ही दिन पर शुरुआत पश्चिमी फ़रवरी 3 या 4 हर साल. फिर विपरीत चक्र के चांद्र वर्ष है, जो के साथ शुरू होता है चूहे, कृषि कैलेंडर के साथ शुरू होता है बाघ के रूप में यह पहली जानवर के वसंत. चारों ओर गर्मी के दिनों में रह रहे हैं कि तुलना में सर्दियों के दिनों में, क्योंकि यह तब होता है के मतभेद नेपच्यून और एफ़ेलिओन.

के रूप में प्रत्येक हस्ताक्षर के लिए जुड़ा हुआ है एक महीने के सौर वर्ष है, जिससे भी जुड़ा हुआ है करने के लिए एक मौसम है। तत्वों में से प्रत्येक भी जुड़ा हुआ है करने के लिए एक सीजन में (ऊपर देखें), और तत्व है कि एक सीजन के साथ एक संकेत है, के रूप में जाना जाता है कि हस्ताक्षर के "तत्व तय"है। दूसरे शब्दों में, कि तत्व माना जाता है प्रदान करने के लिए अपनी विशेषताओं में से कुछ के लिए साइन चिंतित है। निश्चित तत्व के प्रत्येक हस्ताक्षर के लिए भी लागू होता है वर्ष और घंटे के संकेत, और न सिर्फ मासिक संकेत है। यह महत्वपूर्ण है कि नोट करने के लिए निश्चित तत्व से अलग है चक्र का जो तत्वों के साथ बातचीत में संकेत के 60 साल के चक्र.
चीनी राशि भी प्रयोग किया जाता है लेबल करने के लिए दिन के समय के साथ, प्रत्येक हस्ताक्षर करने के लिए इसी एक "बड़े-घंटे" या "shichen" (時辰) है, जो एक दो घंटे की अवधि (24 विभाजित 12 जानवरों)। निर्धारण इस अवधि पर निर्भर करता है जानने के लिए एक व्यक्ति की सही जन्म के समय है। गुप्त जानवर है करने के लिए सोचा हो सकता है एक व्यक्ति के truest प्रतिनिधित्व के बाद से, इस जानवर द्वारा निर्धारित किया जाता है छोटी से छोटी विभाजक: एक व्यक्ति के जन्म के घंटे है। के रूप में इस पर हस्ताक्षर की स्थिति के आधार पर आकाश में सूर्य और समय नहीं दिखाया पर एक स्थानीय घड़ी है, के अनुयायियों के लिए इस प्रणाली का मानना है कि यह महत्वपूर्ण होने के लिए क्षतिपूर्ति करने के लिए डेलाइट समय बचत के लिए है। हालांकि, कुछ ऑन-लाइन सिस्टम पहले से ही क्षतिपूर्ति के लिए डेलाइट बचत समय है, और ज्योतिषियों हो सकता है इस के लिए क्षतिपूर्ति के रूप में अच्छी तरह से, भले ही एक ग्राहक पहले से ही हो सकता है मुआवजा के लिए यह करने के लिए अग्रणी, एक सैद्धांतिक रूप से गलत पढ़ने.

के भीतर चार स्तंभों, घंटे के लिए है स्तंभ का प्रतिनिधित्व करने के बारे में जानकारी बच्चों और दुनिया के लिए योगदान या बाद में जीवन.
कई बार ऊपर के आधार पर कर रहे हैं स्थानीय सौर समय, के बजाय मानक समय. करने के लिए परिवर्तित करने के लिए मानक समय, एक की जरूरत है जोड़ने के लिए या दूर ले करने के लिए 30 मिनट या अधिक पर निर्भर करता है, एक जन्म स्थान पश्चिम या पूर्व में क्रमश: केंद्रीय मध्याह्न के समय क्षेत्र. लंदन अंकन, केंद्रीय मध्याह्न के GMT सौर समय के बराबर मानक समय है, लेकिन के लिए अन्य शहरों की तरह कार्डिफ स्थित 3° 11' डब्ल्यू, समय पर शुरू होगा 11 मिनट पिछले एक घंटे के लिए है, जबकि नॉरविचस्थित 1° 17' ई, वे शुरू होगा 5 मिनट पहले की है।

न्यूयॉर्क: 22:56 - 00:55 ; शिकागो: 22:50 - 00:49; सैन फ्रांसिस्को: 23:09 - 01:08 ; लॉस एंजिल्स: 22:53 - 00:52

मुंबई: 23:39 - 01:38 ; लागोस: 23:47 - 01:46 ; केप टाउन: 23:47 - 01:46 ; काहिरा: 22:56 - 00:55 ; सिडनी: 23:00 - 00:59 ; बैंकाक: 23:19 - 01:18 ; बीजिंग: 23:15 - 01:14 ; नैरोबी: 23:33 - 01:32 ; ब्यूनस आयर्स: 23:51 - 01:50 ; मास्को: 23:30 - 01:29 ; पेरिस: 23:51 - 01:50

4 स्तंभों कैलकुलेटर का निर्धारण कर सकते हैं राशि चक्र जानवर का दिन है। 

चीनी पशु संकेत पर शासन सप्ताह के दिनों में, भी है। शब्द उनके लिए है "सच जानवरों।" यदि आपके ज्योतिषी इच्छाओं को तैयार करने के लिए एक चार्ट के साथ, यह आवश्यक है कि वह या वह जानता है कि जानवरों के लिए अपने जन्म के दिन. दी, वहाँ रहे हैं केवल सात दिनों के सप्ताह और 12 जानवरों में, वहाँ कुछ पुनरावृत्ति या दोहरीकरण.

जानवरों के प्रत्येक दिन के लिए कर रहे हैं के रूप में इस प्रकार है:

सोमवार: बकरी
मंगलवार: ड्रैगन
बुधवार: घोड़े
गुरुवार: चूहे, सुअर
शुक्रवार: खरगोश, सांप, कुत्ते
शनिवार: बैल, बाघ, मुर्गा
रविवार: बंदर

चीनी राशि के रूप में ली गई है के अनुसार प्राचीन पांच तत्वों सिद्धांत, हर चीनी पर हस्ताक्षर के पांच तत्वों से बना के साथ संबंधों के बीच में, उन तत्वों के प्रक्षेप, बातचीत, अधिक कार्रवाई की है, और जवाबी कार्रवाई माना जा करने के लिए आम कानून की गतियों और परिवर्तन के जीव ब्रह्मांड में. अलग-अलग लोगों के तहत पैदा हुए प्रत्येक जानवर पर हस्ताक्षर माना जाता है कि अलग-अलग व्यक्तित्व, और चिकित्सकों के चीनी ज्योतिष से परामर्श इस तरह के पारंपरिक विवरण और compatibilities की पेशकश करने के लिए ख्यात जीवन में मार्गदर्शन के लिए या प्यार और शादी.

चीनी राशि चक्र अनुकूलता ग्रिड
चार स्तंभों में से विधि का पता लगाया जा सकता वापस करने के लिए हान राजवंश ( विज्ञापन 220), और अभी भी ज्यादा इस्तेमाल में फेंग शुई ज्योतिष और सामान्य विश्लेषण आज. चार स्तंभों में या स्तंभों चार्ट कहा जाता है इस तरह के रूप में चीनी लेखन का कारण बनता है यह में गिर करने के लिए कॉलम. प्रत्येक स्तंभ या स्तंभ शामिल हैं एक स्टेम, और एक शाखा—और प्रत्येक स्तंभ के लिए संबंधित है वर्ष, माह, दिन और जन्म के एक घंटे के. पहले कॉलम को संदर्भित करता है वर्ष पशु और तत्व है, दूसरे महीने के लिए पशु और तत्व है, तीसरे दिन के लिए पशु और तत्व है, और पिछले करने के लिए घंटे के हिसाब से और पशु तत्व है।

भीतर के 'चार स्तम्भों', वर्ष स्तंभ अभिप्राय जानकारी प्रदान करने के लिए के बारे में एक पूर्वज या जल्दी उम्र, और इस महीने के स्तंभ के बारे में एक के माता-पिता या बढ़ती उम्र. दिन स्तंभ अभिप्राय की पेशकश करने के लिए जानकारी के बारे में अपने आप को (ऊपरी चरित्र) और एक पति या पत्नी (कम चरित्र) या वयस्क उम्र, और घंटे के स्तंभ के बारे में बच्चों या देर से उम्र.

The first trine consists of the Rat, Dragon and Monkey. These three signs are said to be intense and powerful individuals capable of great good, who make great leaders but are rather unpredictable. The three are said to be intelligent, magnanimous, charismatic, charming, authoritative, confident, eloquent and artistic, but can be manipulative, jealous, selfish, aggressive, vindictive or deceitful.

The second trine consists of the Ox, Snake and Rooster. These three signs are said to possess endurance and application, with slow accumulation of energy, meticulous at planning but tending to hold fixed opinions. The three are said to be hard-working, modest, industrious, loyal, philosophical, patient, good-hearted and morally upright, but can also be self-righteous, egotistical, vain, judgmental, narrow-minded or petty.

The third trine consists of the Tiger, Horse and Dog. These three signs are said to seek true love, to pursue humanitarian causes, to be idealistic and independent but tending to be impulsive. The three are said to be productive, enthusiastic, independent, engaging, dynamic, honourable, loyal and protective, but can also be rash, rebellious, quarrelsome, anxious, disagreeable or stubborn.

The fourth trine consists of the Rabbit, Goat and Pig. These three signs are said to have a calm nature and an intellectual approach; they seek aesthetic beauty and are artistic, well-mannered and compassionate, yet detached and resigned to their condition. The three are said to be caring, self-sacrificing, obliging, sensible, creative, empathetic, tactful and prudent, but can also be naïve, pedantic, insecure, cunning, indecisive or pessimistic.

There are many stories and fables to explain the beginning of the zodiac. Since the Han Dynasty, the 12 Earthly Branches have been used to record the time of day. However, for the sake of entertainment and convenience, they have been replaced by the 12 animals. The 24 hours are divided into 12 periods, and a mnemonic refers to the behaviour of the animals:

A Branch may refer to a double-hour period. In the latter case it is the center of the period; for instance, 马 (the Horse) means noon or a period from 11am to 1pm.

An Ancient folk story tells that Cat and Rat were the worst swimmers in the animal kingdom. Although they were poor swimmers, they were both quite intelligent. To get to the meeting called by the Jade Emperor, they had to cross a river to reach the meeting place. The Jade Emperor had also decreed that the years on the calendar would be named for each animal in the order they arrived to the meeting. Cat and Rat decided that the best and fastest way to cross the river was to hop on the back of Ox. Ox, being naïve and good-natured, agreed to carry them both across. Midway across the river, Rat pushed Cat into the water. Then as Ox neared the other side of the river, Rat jumped ahead and reached the shore first. So he claimed first place in the competition and the zodiac.

Following closely behind was strong Ox who was named the 2nd animal in the zodiac. After Ox, came Tiger, panting, while explaining to the Jade Emperor how difficult it was to cross the river with the heavy currents pushing it downstream all the time. But with its powerful strength, Tiger made to shore and was named the 3rd animal in the cycle.

Suddenly, from a distance came a thumping sound, and the Rabbit arrived. It explained how it crossed the river: by jumping from one stone to another in a nimble fashion. Halfway through, it almost lost the race, but the Rabbit was lucky enough to grab hold of a floating log that later washed him to shore. For that, it became the 4th animal in the Zodiac cycle. In 5th place was the Flying Dragon. Of course, the Jade Emperor was deeply curious as to why a swift flying creature such as the Dragon should fail to reach first place. The mighty Dragon explained that he had to stop and make rain to help all the people and creatures of the earth, and therefore he was held back. Then, on his way to the finish, he saw a little helpless Rabbit clinging onto a log so he did a good deed and gave a puff of breath to the poor creature so that it could land on the shore. The Jade Emperor was very pleased with the actions of the Dragon, and he was added into the zodiac cycle. As soon as he had done so, a galloping sound was heard, and the Horse appeared. Hidden on the Horse's hoof was the Snake, whose sudden appearance gave the Horse a fright, thus making it fall back and giving the Snake the 6th spot, while the Horse placed 7th.

Not long after that, a little distance away, the Goat, Monkey, and Rooster came to the shore. These three creatures helped each other to get to where they are. The Rooster spotted a raft, and took the other two animals with it. Together, the Goat and the Monkey cleared the weeds, tugged and pulled and finally got the raft to the shore. Because of their combined efforts, the Emperor was very pleased and promptly named the Goat as the 8th creature, the Monkey as the 9th, and the Rooster the 10th.

The 11th animal was the Dog. Although he was supposed to be the best swimmer, he could not resist the temptation to play a little longer in the river. Though his explanation for being late was because he needed a good bath after a long spell. For that, he almost didn't make it to the finish line. Just as the Jade Emperor was about to call it a day, an oink and squeal was heard from a little Pig. The Pig got hungry during the race, promptly stopped for a feast and then fell asleep. After the nap, the Pig continued the race and was named the 12th animal of the zodiac cycle. The cat drowned in 13th place and did not make it in the zodiac. It is said that is the reason why cats always chase Rats; to get back at them for what they have done.

Another folk story tells that on registration day, the Rat met up with the Ox. He thought to himself "Ox is the fastest, strongest animal!" So the little Rat played a trick on the Ox. He asked the Ox if he would like to listen to him sing. The Rat opened his mouth but said nothing. "How was that?" he asked the Ox and of course he replied "Sorry little Rat, I didn't hear you." The Rat told the Ox to let him jump onto his back so that he could sing it more clearly, and the Ox agreed. Soon without knowing, the Ox was walking to the signing post, forgetting the Rat on his back. When they reached there, the Rat jumped off and claimed first place. The Ox following and the rest.

In Buddhism, legend has it that Buddha summoned all of the animals of the earth to come before him before his departure from this earth, but only 12 animals actually came to bid him farewell. To reward the animals who came to him, he named a year after each of them. The years were given to them in the order they had arrived.

The 12 animals of the Chinese zodiac must have been developed in the early stages of Chinese civilization over hundreds of years before it became the current edition; and it's very hard to investigate the real origin. Most historians agree that Cat is not in the list since the 12 animals of the Chinese zodiac were formed before cats were introduced to China from India with Buddhism.

Another story tells that God called the animals to a banquet that night. The Rat, who loved to play tricks on his neighbor, told the cat that the banquet was on the day after tomorrow. The cat believed his neighbour the Rat and slept whilst dreaming of the banquet. The next day, the Rat arrived first followed by the Ox, the Tiger and the rest of the animals. The order of the animals was decided by the order that they arrived. The cat was devastated and vowed that he would always hate the Rat. This is why cats chase Rats in folklore.

Due to confusion with synonyms during translation, some of the animals depicted by the English words did not exist in ancient China. For example, 羊 can mean ram, sheep or Goat. Similarly, 鼠 (Rat) can also be translated as mouse, as there are no distinctive words for the two genera in Chinese. Further, 豬 (Pig) is sometimes translated to boar after its Japanese name, and 牛 plainly means cow or Ox, and not water buffalo, 水牛. 雞 (Rooster) may mean chicken or cock. However, Rooster is the most commonly used one among all the synonyms, same for 羊, 鼠, etc.

The Chinese zodiac signs are also used by cultures other than Chinese. For one example, they usually appear on Korean New Year and Japanese New Year's cards and stamps. The United States Postal Service and those of several other countries issue a "Year of the ____" postage stamp each year to honor this Chinese heritage.

The Chinese lunar coins, depicting the zodiac animals, inspired the Canadian Silver Maple Leaf coins, as well as varieties from Australia, Korea, and Mongolia. The Chinese zodiac is an internationally popular theme, available from many of the world's government and private mints.

The Chinese zodiac is also used in some other Asian countries that have been under the cultural influence of China. However, some of the animals in the zodiac may differ by country.

The Korean zodiac is almost identical to the Chinese zodiac except it includes the "Sheep" instead of the "Goat". The Vietnamese zodiac is almost identical to the Chinese zodiac except the second animal is the "Water Buffalo" instead of the "Ox", and the fourth animal is the "Cat" instead of the "Rabbit". The Japanese zodiac includes the "Sheep" instead of the "Goat", and the "Wild Boar" instead of the "Pig". The Japanese have since 1873 celebrated the beginning of the new year on 1 January as per the Gregorian Calendar. The Thai zodiac includes a "nāga" in place of the "Dragon" and begins, not at Chinese New Year, but either on the first day of fifth month in Thai lunar calendar, or during the Songkran festival (now celebrated every 13–15 April), depending on the purpose of the use.

The European Huns used the Chinese zodiac complete with "Dragon" "Pig". This common Chinese-Turkic Zodiac was in use in Balkan Bulgaria well into the Bulgars' adoption of Slavic language and Orthodox Christianity .
Following is the Hunnish or Bulgarian Pagan zodiac calendar, distinctive from the Greek zodiac but much in conformity with the Chinese one:

Names of years
In Kazakhstan, an animal cycle similar to the Chinese is used, but the Dragon is substituted by a snail (Kazakh: улу
), and Tiger appears as a leopard (Kazakh: барыс

In Mongolia 12 year beasts are called "Арван хоёр жил" meaning "12 years"


