हड़ौती

हाड़ौती (जिसे हाड़ौली, हाड़ावली, इत्यादि नाम से भी जाना जाता है) बूंदी राज्य था। यह पूर्वी राजस्थान में स्थित है। इसके बड़े शहरों में बूंदी और कोटा हैं।

इसमें सम्मिलित जिले हैं:

इसके पश्चिम में मेवाड़, उत्तर पश्चिम में अजमेर हैं। इसके दक्षिण में मालवा और पूर्व में गिर्द क्षेत्र हैं।
Hadoti (हाड़ौती) :
Bundi-. 
Pratihar Meenas is one of the sub group of Meenas. They are mainly found in the region of Bundi city. They were initial builder of Bundi and Bundi is named after the King Bandu Meena. In ancient time Bundi was called “Bandu-Ka-Nal", Nal means “narrow ways” and later the region is governed by Rao Deva Hara. He took over Bundi from Jaita Meena in 1342 and he renamed the whole area as Haravati or Haroti.
Kota:- 
In one such battle in 1264, Jait Singh, the younger son of Samar Singh of Bundi slew the Bhil chieftain, Kotya and captured Akelgarh. He was so impressed by Kotya’s bravery that he named his newly conquered principality Kotah after him. The severed head of Kotya was buried in the foundations of Jait Singh’s new fort. Kotya has been honoured and remembered daily ever since in the Kotya Bhil Temple. This is in the outer wall of the Palace to the left of the main gate. Kota may be the only town named after the loser and not the victor! The Independant state of kota became a reality in 1631 The fort, which was further modified by subsequent rulers, is still in existence, and is known commonly among the local populace as the Garh Palace. 
Jhalawar:- 
In 1838 it was resolved, with the consent of the chief of Kota, to dismember the state, and to create the new principality of Jhalawar as a separate provision for the descendants of Zalim Singh. 
Baran:- 
city was under Solanki Rajputs in the 14th -15th century. It is not exactly known that when the main town of the twelve villages under Solanki's was being named as 'Baran'. There are several thoughts for it, like some says since it was formed by twelve villages so it is called 'Baran', others says since the city was built by the 12 nearby villagers so it is named as 'Baran'. There are also saying that since the soils of the area is mostly 'Barani' so it is called 'Baran'

It was called Bundi Kingdom before several states separated, is a region of Rajasthan state in western India. The biggest cities are Bundi and Kota.
It includes the districts of Bundi, Baran, Jhalawar and Kota, and is bounded on the west by the Mewar, on the northwest by Ajmer regions of Rajasthan, and on the south by the Malwa, on the east by the Gird regions of Madhya Pradesh state.
The name of the region is derived from the Tripta Hada Rajputs, a branch of the great Chauhan Rajput clan. The Hadas settled in the region in the 12th century and dominated the area for several centuries thereafter. Hada Rao Deva conquered Bundi in 1241 and nearby Kota in 1264. At one time, the Hada-ruled state of Bundi encompassed the present-day districts of Baran, Bundi, Kota, and Jhalawar. 
From:
Pranay Sharma


[[हाडोती शब्द के कुछ उदारण-बीजणी-हाथ पंखा,माउट-ओस,ढुढयो-लडका,ककोडा-कुछ नही,कटे जा रहे ए- कहां जा रहा है