जौनसार बावर

जौनसार बावर मसूरी के १५ किलोमीटर दूर चकराता तहसील में देहरादून जिले का एक गाँव है। यह स्थान जौनसारी जनजाति का मूल स्थान है। 
The Jaunsar Bawar region, is a tribal valley, spread over 1002 sq km and 400 villages, between 77.45' and 78.7'20" East to 30.31' and 31.3'3" North. It is defined in the east, by the river Yamuna and by river Tons in the west, the northern part comprises Uttarkashi district, and some parts of Himachal Pradesh, the Dehradun tehsil forms its southern peripery.

Modes of livelihood in this region are agriculture and animal husbandry, which in the upper region is mostly for self-sustenance, as merely 10 percent of cultivated area is irrigated. Milk, wool and meat are the animal product which are integral part of the local economy.

In 1829, Jaunsar-Bawar was incorporated in Chakrata tehsil, prior to which it had been a part of Punjab state of Sirmur, till the British conquered it along with Dehradun after the 1814 war with the Gurkhas. 

Before the establishment of British Indian Army cantonment in 1866, the entire was known as Jaunsar Bawar, and the name continued to be in popular use for the region, till early 20th century. While western Hindi was popular in most of the neighbouting hill areass, 'Jaunsari' language, part of the Central Pahari languages was spoken by most of the people of the region.

Traditionally, Jaunsar Bawar region has been known as its rich reserves of forested areas, in the high hills region, with trees of Deodar, Pine, and spruce, made for it becoming a important destination for the timber even during the British period, when the logs were rolled down the slopes and floated on Yamuna river to Delhi.

The culture of the local Jaunsari tribe is distinct from other hill tribes in Garhwal, Kumaon and Himachal Pradesh, a fact demonstrated by the presence of polygamy and polyandry in the local traditions, with richer tribesmen practicing polygamy, while their poor counterparts, choose to share a wife (polyandry), though the husbands should be brothers, a fact which is often connected to, the five Pandava brothers in the Mahabharata, marrying Draupadi, from whom Jaunsaries trace their ethinic origin. Though, anthropology studies in the 1990s revealed that these practises were fast phasing out, and is being replaced by monogamy

An important aspect of their culture are festive sports and dances like the folk dance named 'Barada Nati' during all festive occasions, like 'Magh Mela' which is the most important festival of the Jaunsaries, it is marked by an animal sacrifice ritual, which celebrates the killing of 'Maroj', an ogre, which according to local legends, stalked the valleys for years. 

During festivals, people wear the Thalka or Lohiya, which is a long coat. The dancers - both boys and girls - wear colorful traditional costumes.

The Jaunsari tribe of the region has been using over 100 plants for the treatment of various ailments, which have remained a subject for many Ethnobotanical and Ethnopharamcological studies.

Traditionally, due to abject poverty, arising from infertile land and adverse climatic conditions in the region, bonded labour has been a fact of life, but the situation improved after the implementation of the 'Bonded Labour Abolition Act, 1976', when over 20,000 bonded labours were reported from the region, but practise never left the region, and in 2005, presence bonded labourers was reported again in the Jaunsar Bawar region, especially amongst poorest of the tribal communities, like Koltas, Das and Bajgi communities, who are entrapped in the bonded labour for generations, by their rich counterparts in the tribal belt, this is despite the fact that, due to not availability of local land records, the government had made a separate legislation for this area, 'The Jaunsar Bawar Zamindar Abolition of Land Reform Act 1956 (U.P. Act XI of 1956)', which came into effect in July 1961.

A temple built in the Huna architectural style - at an altitude of 1,700 m - is one of the principal attractions of Jaunsar-Bawar. The village is endowed with natural beauty and here one can see the sprawling Doon Valley and the magnificent Garhwal Himalayas flanked by rivers Yamuna and Tons. The ideal time to visit this village is between May and June. The closest airport is Jolly Grant and the nearest railway station is at Dehradun.

One of the places to visit is the village called Lakhamandal, on the banks of river Yamuna for its Himalayan view, and the 5th century Shiva temple, apart from natural caves that are said to have been used by the Pandavas. 

Basic facilities exist for travellers. Warm clothes may be suggested for the winters and basic medication is recommended. Buses and taxis are available from Dehradun and Mussoorie.

"Raaste Band Hain Sab", a film based on the work of Dr. Jayoti Gupta, Dept. of Sociology, Delhi University, on Jaunsar Bawar, and made by Manjira Dutta, won the National Film Award for Best Anthropological/Ethnographic Film in 1988.


