भारतीय पेट्रोलियम संस्थान

The Indian Institute of Petroleum (IIP) is one of the constituent laboratories of the Council of Scientific & Industrial Research (CSIR), it is a premier organisation dedicated to Research & Technology development in hydrocarbon sector. The Institute has continued its efforts to grow into an internationally renowned R&D organisation, providing quality research and innovative technologies for the national and international market place and to produce technical support to the industry.

It is situated in Dehradun, the capital of Uttarakhand state, on National Highway no. 72.Established through an act of parliament in the year 1959, it started functioning initially at New Delhi in 1960 and finally at Dehradun since 1963. In pursuit of excellence it sought initial organisational help from Institut français du pétrole (IFP), France, the world renowned petroleum research organisation, under UNESCO programme during 1960 to 1964. An ISO 9001 certified Institute, it is devoted to multidisciplinary areas of Research and Development in the down stream sector of hydrocarbon and related industry . The acquirement of ISO-9001 certification by the institute in 1998 is a step forward. It has dedicated, experienced and qualified staff out of which 132 are R&D Scientists supported by 208 highly skilled technical personnel. It is equipped with comprehensive state-of-the-art R&D facilities including pilot plants. Annual budget of the Institute, currently, is around 18 crores.Institute is recognised by many Universities to conduct research leading to Doctorate degree.

Development of processes for petroleum refining / petro chemicals / petroleum products and application Assistance to refineries in selection, and adoption of technologies and optimization of their unit operations,Evaluation of crudes & petro products 
Technical services Conduct techno-economic feasibility studies and market demand surveys of petroleum products. Impart training to personnel of oil / petrochemical industry Assistance to BIS in formulating standards for petroleum products
Applied research leading to the development of technologies, products and processes in the area of Petroleum refining, Petrochemicals, Speciality chemicals, IC engines, and Combustion 
Basic / Fundamental research 

Process & product development (lab / bench / pilot scale) 
Process scale-up, process design 
Process optimization 
Process improvement & revamping 
Techno-economic feasibility studies 
Technology assessment 
Energy audit and conservation in chemical plants 
Vehicular pollution abatement 
Use of alternative fuels in IC engines 
Product characterisation 
Petroleum Refining & Catalysis
Catalytic refining and catalysis 
Catalyst for refining process 
Separation process, solvent extraction, adsorption, membranes 
Lubricating oil base stocks processes, evaluation and characterisation 
Modified bitumen and carbon materials 
Thermal conversion process 
Modeling and simulation
Chemical /Petrochemicals Intermediates
Additives for petrochemicals industry 
Process and product development for specialty chemicals 
Petrochemicals intermediates 
Bioprocessing of petroleum streams 
Fuel Lubes and chemicals from Biomass

Engine emission : pollution abatements 
Alternative fuels : oxygenates, CNG, Propane, LPG, DME 
Engine development: improved efficiency, lower emission 
Tribology : Evaluation and development of petroleum products, and developments of techniques for product evaluation 
Combustion : Developments of industrial and domestic combustion appliances, evaluation of fire resistant properties of hydraulic fluids
Detailed and short evaluation of crude oil 
Characterisation of petroleum products 
Characterisation of catalyst 
Technical and support services 
Instrumental analysis 
Engineering services 
Training 
Business developments and technology transfer

Production of food grade hexane by using nmp technology 2001. 

Lube oil base stock (lobs) production through nmp 2000. 

Propane deasphalting 1999. 

Visbreaking technology 1998. 

Sulfolane production technology 1997. 

Business development & technology marketing 1996. 

Low air pressure film burner 1994. 

Food grade hexane 1993. 

Bimetallic pt-re reforming catalyst 1992. 

Production of benzene / toluene through sulfolane extraction 1990. 

1990 young scientist. 

1993 federation of Indian chambers of commerce and industry (ficci).

Excellence in science and technology 1993. 

Production of benzene / toluene through sulpholane extraction 1986. 

Production of benzene / toluene through sulpholane extraction 1985.

Institute has developed a large number of processes and technologies. Thirty eight technologies having licensed capacity around 25 million tonnes per annum transferred to the industry. Almost every refinery in the country has technologies licensed by the institute. Test techniques developed for evaluation of petroleum products included in BIS specifications. Established global tie-ups for contract research and technical services. 
Filed 185 patents in India and 29 patents abroad.PhD degrees awarded to about fifty research fellows and Scientist of the institute by various universities. A large number of research paper published in reputed International and National journals bestowed with many prestigious awards in recognition of excellence in various fields.
